I thank my mentors, Lyle and Aydin, for their support and guidance
during my graduate studies. Lyle taught me to focus on the main
contributions of my work and the work of others, and how to choose the
right null hypothesis. Aydin provided me with a deeper understanding
of peer review, grant writing and reviewing, and initiating
collaborations with other researchers. Both mentors helped me learn to
translate projects into papers.

I thank my thesis committee members for their help with my
dissertation and other projects. I'm glad I worked with Sridhar during
my first rotation, and I'm thankful for his focus on controls. Rick
and Sara's focus on the biological importance of computational
projects will guide me during the rest of my research career.

I thank the students at Penn and Drexel for their friendship and
research discussions. I enjoyed working with Greg while taking over
his rotation project. I'm thankful that I was able to talk to Rithun
about HIV. I'm very glad that Will has been around for scientific
discussions.

I'm thankful that I found friends to accompany me during explorations
of the east coast. I'm glad I met Logan, Rumen, Ryan, Kathleen, Mahdi,
Yichuan, Noor, Adam, Mike, and Andrew. I'm glad Christin found me.

I thank my parents for their support during graduate school. They
helped me look for an apartment when I started school. They traveled
to Philadelphia when I had surgery, and stayed with me until I was
back on my feet (literally). They came to see my defense despite my
insistence that they did not need to.

I thank the Upenn hospital doctors for unraveling my intestines and
finally locating and removing my appendix. Extreme abdominal pain has
forced me to visit three hospitals, and my Upenn hospital experience
has been the most successful.

Finally, I thank my funding sources. This work was supported by
National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant \# 232240, NIH training
grant T32 HG000046, and National Science Foundation grant \# 235327.